Scala
1.	What is a trait ? when to use ?  example

Short Answer :
A Trait is Defined as unit used to encapsulate the method and its variables.


Example: 

Useful for code reusability, mixins, and abstracting behavior.

Long Answer : What is a Trait?

A trait in Scala is similar to an interface in Java, but it’s more powerful. 

key points:

A trait defines a set of methods and fields that can be mixed into classes.
Unlike Java interfaces, traits can also contain concrete method implementations.
A class can extend multiple traits, allowing for flexible composition.

When to Use Traits:

Traits are useful in several scenarios
Code Reusability, Mixins, Multiple Inheritance, Abstracting Common Behavior

Example:

Scenario: Modeling Vehicles with Traits
Trait: Vehicle
Defines common behavior for all vehicles.
Abstract methods:
startEngine(): Represents starting the vehicle’s engine.
stopEngine(): Represents stopping the vehicle’s engine.
accelerate(speed: Double): Represents accelerating the vehicle to a given speed.
Class: Car
Implements the Vehicle trait.
Provides specific behavior related to cars:
Overrides startEngine() to print a message about starting the car’s engine.
Overrides stopEngine() to print a message about stopping the car’s engine.
Overrides accelerate(speed) to indicate acceleration in miles per hour.
Class: Bicycle
Also implements the Vehicle trait.
Provides different behavior suitable for bicycles:
Overrides startEngine() to acknowledge that bicycles don’t have engines.
Overrides stopEngine() with a message specific to bicycles.
Overrides accelerate(speed) to describe pedaling faster.
In summary, the Vehicle trait defines the core methods, and both the Car and Bicycle classes adapt these methods to their respective contexts.


2.	Difference between trait and sealed trait?
	Short Answer: A trait in Scala is similar to an interface in Java. and A sealed trait is a special kind of trait with additional restrictions.
use case : 
	Traits: Use normal traits when you want to share behavior across classes without restricting where those classes can be defined.
	Sealed Traits: Use sealed traits when you have a finite and known set of subclasses that should be tightly controlled within a single file. This ensures that all possible subtypes are explicitly handled.

Long Answer :

Trait:

A trait in Scala is similar to an interface in Java. Here are the key points:

Traits define a set of methods and fields that can be shared among multiple classes.
They can contain both abstract (unimplemented) methods and concrete (implemented) methods.
Classes can extend multiple traits, allowing for flexible composition.
Traits cannot be instantiated directly; they serve as blueprints for classes.

Sealed Trait:
A sealed trait is a special kind of trait with additional restrictions:
All its subclasses (implementations) must be defined in the same file where the sealed trait is declared.
The compiler knows all possible subtypes of a sealed trait, which enables better type safety.
Sealed traits are often used as an alternative to enums.
When pattern matching on a sealed trait, the compiler warns if the match is not exhaustive.

Use Cases:

Traits: Use normal traits when you want to share behavior across classes without restricting where those classes can be defined.
Sealed Traits: Use sealed traits when you have a finite and known set of subclasses that should be tightly controlled within a single file. This ensures that all possible subtypes are explicitly handled.

Example: 
Scenario: Modeling Animals with Traits Imagine we want to model different animals—specifically, animals that have tails. We’ll create a trait called TailWagger to represent this common behavior.
Scala

// Define the TailWagger trait
trait TailWagger {
    def startTail(): Unit
    def stopTail(): Unit
}

// Create a class for a specific animal (e.g., Dog)
class Dog(val name: String) extends TailWagger {
    override def startTail(): Unit =
        println(s"$name's tail is wagging happily!")

    override def stopTail(): Unit =
        println(s"$name's tail stopped wagging.")
}

// Usage
val myDog = new Dog("Buddy")
myDog.startTail() // Output: Buddy's tail is wagging happily!
myDog.stopTail()  // Output: Buddy's tail stopped wagging.

The TailWagger trait defines two abstract methods: startTail() and stopTail().
The Dog class extends the TailWagger trait and provides concrete implementations for these methods.
When we create an instance of Dog (e.g., myDog), we can call its tail-related methods.


3.	What is an abstract class? 

Short Answer :

an abstract class is a blueprint for other classes. It cannot be directly instantiated and serves as a base class. Abstract classes can contain both abstract (undefined) methods and non-abstract (defined) methods. Unlike traits, which allow multiple inheritance, a class can extend only one abstract class1. They are particularly useful when you need constructor arguments or when calling Scala code from Java

Long Answer:

	Definition:
An abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated directly. It serves as a blueprint for other classes.
Abstract classes can contain both abstract (undefined) methods and non-abstract (defined) methods.
Unlike regular classes, you cannot create instances of an abstract class using the new keyword.
	Purpose and Usage:
Abstract classes are designed to provide common functionality and define a contract that derived (subclasses) classes must fulfill.
They allow you to create a base class with shared behavior that can be inherited by multiple subclasses.
Abstract classes are particularly useful when you want to enforce certain methods to be implemented by subclasses.

	Syntax:
	abstract class Pet(name: String) {
    def speak(): Unit
    // Other non-abstract methods can also be defined here
}
	
	Inheritance and Implementation:
Subclasses (concrete classes) extend abstract classes and provide implementations for the abstract methods.
Abstract methods are declared without a body (no implementation) in the abstract class.
Subclasses must override these abstract methods and provide their own implementations.

	Limitations:
A class can extend only one abstract class (unlike traits, which allow multiple inheritance).
Abstract classes are more restrictive than traits but can be useful in specific scenarios.

4.	What is the difference between  java interface and a scala trait?

Short Answer : 

	Java Interfaces: Simple contracts with method signatures.
	Scala Traits: Super-powered contracts with method signatures and optional implementations. They’re great for modular code design.

Long Answer: 
	
	Java Interfaces:

	What Are They?: Imagine you have a contract—a set of rules—that different classes must follow. Java interfaces are like such contracts.
	What They Contain?: Interfaces define method signatures (like a blueprint) that classes implementing them must provide.

	Example:

// Java interface
interface Animal {
    void makeSound();
}

// Class implementing the interface
class Dog implements Animal {
    @Override
    public void makeSound() {
        System.out.println("Woof!");
    }
}

Scala Traits:

 Traits as super-powered interfaces. They not only define method signatures but can also provide method implementations.
What They Can Do?: Traits allow you to mix in behavior to classes. They’re like Lego pieces you can attach to your classes.

	Example:
	
	// Scala trait
trait Pet {
    def speak(): Unit
}

// Class mixing in the trait
class Dog(val name: String) extends Pet {
    override def speak(): Unit = println(s"$name says Woof!")
}


5.	What is a singleton 

Short Answer: A singleton is like a special character—unique, always there, and ready to help.

Long Answer : 

Singleton: Imagine you have a special object that exists only once in your entire program. It’s like having a unique superhero—there’s only one of them. That’s what we call a singleton.
Why Singleton?: We use singletons when we want a single instance of something to be shared across our code.
Example:
Suppose we’re building a logging system. We want only one logger to handle all messages.
We create a singleton object called Logger.
Whenever we need to log something, we use this one and only Logger.

// Singleton object
object Logger {
    def log(message: String): Unit = {
        println(s"LOG: $message")
    }
}

// Usage
Logger.log("Hello, world!") // Prints: LOG: Hello, world!


6.	What is a higher order function?

	Short Answer : Higher-order functions are like function managers—they handle other functions for us!
	
	Long Answer : 

	 Imagine you have a function that either takes other functions as arguments or returns a function as its result. It’s like a function that deals with other functions—it’s a higher-order function!
Why Higher-Order?: We use them to build flexible and reusable code.

Example:
Suppose we want to double a number and print the result.
We create a higher-order function called doubleAndPrint.
It takes an integer (a) and another function (f) that transforms the integer (like doubling it).
The result is printed out.

// Higher-order function
def doubleAndPrint(a: Int, f: Int => Int): Unit = {
    val result = f(a)
    println(s"The value is now $result")
}

// Usage
doubleAndPrint(5, a => a * 2) // Prints: "The value is now 10"


7.	What is a closure function

Short Answer : Closures are like memory wizards—they hold onto things you thought were forgotten!

Long Answer: 

	Imagine you have a magical function that remembers things from its surroundings—even after those things are gone. That’s a closure!
How It Works?: A closure is a function that “closes over” variables from its outer scope. It keeps those variables alive, even when they’re out of sight.
Example:
Suppose we want a function that adds a fixed number to any given value.
We create a closure called addN that captures the fixed number.
The closure remembers that number, no matter where it’s used.

	// Closure example
def addN(fixedNumber: Int): Int => Int = {
    (value: Int) => value + fixedNumber
}

// Usage
val addFive = addN(5)
println(addFive(10)) // Prints: 15 (10 + 5)


8.	What is a companion object? What are the advantages ? example

	Short Answer : Companion objects are like loyal sidekicks—they make your class shine! 

	Long Answer :  For example i  have a best friend who’s always there for me, knows your secrets, and complements your strengths. That’s what a companion object is for a Scala class!

What It Does?: A companion object is like a sidekick to a class. It lives in the same file and shares secrets with the class.
Advantages:
Access to Private Members: A companion object can access private members (fields and methods) of its class.
Factory Methods: It provides a place for factory methods (like creating instances without the new keyword).
Shared Code: You can put shared code in a companion object.
  
	class Person(val name: String)

object Person {
    def create(name: String): Person = new Person(name)
}

val p = Person.create("Alice")
println(s"Hello, ${p.name}!")


9.	Nil vs Null vs null vs Nothing vs None vs Unit 

	Short Answer :
	
	Nil:
	Represents an empty list (like having no groceries in your shopping cart).
	Used to initialize empty lists in Scala.
	Null:
	Represents an absent value (like the “void” of Scala).
	Avoid using it; prefer Option types instead.
	Nothing:
	A type with no instances (like an empty universe).
	Often used for functions that never return (e.g., throwing exceptions).
	None:
	Represents an empty option (like an empty box).
	Subtype of Option for handling absence of a value.
	Unit:
	Equivalent to Java’s void.
	Used for functions that don’t return anything.

Long Answer:
	Nil:
	What Is It?: Imagine an empty list—like having no groceries in your shopping cart. That’s what Nil represents in Scala.
	Usage: It’s an empty singleton object list that extends the List type. Use it to initialize empty lists.
	Example val myList = Nil
	println(s"A list is initialized with length ${myList.length}")
	
	Example:
	val nullRefCar: Car = null
println(nullRefCar.make) // Causes NullPointerException

	Null:
	
	What Is It?: Think of it as the “absence of an object.” It’s used to represent missing values.
Usage: Avoid it! Instead, use Option types to handle possible empty values.

	Example:
	val nullRefCar: Car = null
println(nullRefCar.make) // Causes NullPointerException

	Nothing:
	
	What Is It?: Imagine a type with no instances—it’s like an empty universe.
	Usage: It’s often used for functions that never return (e.g., throwing exceptions).

Example: def neverReturns: Nothing = throw new Exception("Oops!")

	

	None:
	What Is It?: Picture an empty box—it’s like saying, “There’s nothing inside.”
	Usage: It’s a subtype of Option. Use it to represent absence of a value.

	Example: val maybeName: Option[String] = None

	Unit:
	What Is It?: Think of it as the “void” of Scala—it’s used for functions that don’t return anything.
	Usage: When a function has no meaningful result.
	
	Example:
	def greet(name: String): Unit = println(s"Hello, $name!")


	



10.	What is pure function?

	Short Answer: 
	Pure functions are like trustworthy recipes—no secret ingredients, just reliable cooking!

	Long Answer: 

	Pure Function: for example we are cooking a recipe that always gives the same result when you follow it. That’s what a pure function is in programming!

What It Does?: A pure function is like a reliable recipe. It:
Takes some ingredients (input).

Follows a specific set of steps (algorithm).
Always produces the same dish (output).

Advantages:

Predictable: Pure functions are consistent—you know what to expect.
No Surprises: They don’t mess with hidden stuff outside the recipe.
Easy Testing: You can test them easily because they’re so predictable.

Example:

// Pure function: Doubles a number
def doubleIt(number: Int): Int = {
    number * 2
}

val result = doubleIt(5) // Always 10



11.	What is SBT and how have you used it?

	Short Answer:
	
	SBT (Scala Build Tool) is a powerful and widely used build tool in the Scala ecosystem. It’s specifically designed for managing Scala projects, handling dependencies, compiling code, and running tests.

	Long Answer: 

	Definition: SBT is a build tool that automates various tasks related to building, testing, and packaging Scala projects.
	
Features:
	Native Scala Support: SBT understands Scala projects deeply.
	Dependency Management: It handles library dependencies seamlessly.
	Incremental Compilation: Only recompiles what’s necessary for faster development.
	Flexible Configuration: SBT uses a rich DSL (Domain-Specific Language) for project configuration.
	Extensible: You can add custom plugins to enhance your project.

How Have I Used SBT?
Creating Projects: I’ve seen developers use SBT to set up new Scala projects quickly.
Managing Dependencies: SBT resolves and manages library dependencies (like adding external libraries to your project).
Compiling Code: Developers use SBT to compile Scala code into bytecode.
Running Tests: SBT runs test suites to ensure code quality.
Packaging JARs: It packages your Scala code into JAR files for distribution.

Example:
Imagine you’re starting a new Scala project. You’d create an SBT project, define dependencies in the build.sbt file, and run sbt compile or sbt test to build and test your code.

 
12.	What is currying?
13.	Difference between currying and higher-order functions
14.	Difference between var and val?
15.	What is case class?
16.	Why/when to use case class? Example
17.	Difference between case class and normal class?
18.	Scala type hierarchy?
19.	What are partially applied functions?
20.	What is tail recursion.